Number five throughout history is uh
man's inventiveness particularly of new
technologies. Okay. And here we are with
AI and all of those are connected.
They're each relate. How what happens
with AI affects productivity affects who
gets the money. What happens in
geopolitical? You have to spend money to
have a military and the conflicts and
then there are trade wars and it all
transpires pretty much in the same way
over those 500 years. You can see these
cycles in that pattern.
Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLots podcast. I'm Joe Weisenthal
>> and I'm Tracy Aloway. So Tracy, since
we've been doing the podcast for 10
years, you know, uh trying to talk to
some of the big thinkers, right? Some of
the people who have a little bit of a
perspective on how the world's changed.
We say how the world's changed in 10
years, but it's a little bit arbitrary.
How the world's changed and maybe what
the next 10 years or 50 years are going
to be like. Uh zoom out.
>> Thinkers thinking big thoughts.
>> Zooming out a little bit. And I think
everyone sort of is these days. I mean,
it happens to be that we're sort of
celebrating our anniversary or birthday
or whatever it is, but it's just I think
it's just in the air, you know, like
everyone I guess people are always
trying to think big, but there's
something in the air right now where
everyone is trying to grapple with
pretty evident change that is a foot.
>> Well, here's the thing. The the big
story in markets is AI. Sure. Right. And
whether or not it's in a bubble. And AI
is a story that is not just about
finance and markets. is a story that
like touches multiple things. It's a
cultural, a social and political story.
Uh so you have people talking literally
about how AI is going to change the
world. It's going to change art. It's
going to change music, movies, uh people
as well, right? So some people are going
to lose their jobs. Some people are
going to get rich. People talk about it
in this existential way both for
countries and companies to your point.
And if you don't win in the AI race,
then you are literally dead
>> or part of the permanent underclass or
whatever people say. And then I think
beyond AI, even if we didn't have this
boom that really started in late 2022,
even if that weren't going on, there
would be all these other big questions
related to technological competition
because we already talked about that
particularly in China. There would be
all the concerns about the size of the
debt. there'd be all the concerns about
demographics and so forth and the
perhaps strain that changes in
demographics are going to put on the
existing labor force. So yes, you have
all of these things going on, big
picture questions, then layer into the
AI question. And I just feel like people
right now, yes, we all feel it. We're
consumed by these like sort of forward
uncertainty or questions about the
integrity of elections and democracy and
all of these things, this sort of the
the we're at this clearing of the woods
where we don't know which direction
we're going to go. you know who's very
good at synthesizing major forces going
on in the world.
>> Uh well, we do indeed have the perfect
guest. Uh someone who many people turn
to and who obviously has an incredible
track record of talking about things
both in the big picture and shorter
cycles. We are going to be speaking with
Ray Dalio, the founder of Bridgewater.
He ran it for 50 years. That's kind of
unbelievable. You know, we like
>> seen many market cycles.
>> We're proud of 10 years of doing a
podcast. uh 50 years of running what
became the world's biggest hedge fund is
an orders of magnitude more impressive
accomplishment. So Rey, thrilled that
you're in here in studio with us.
Thrilled that you're taking the time to
chat with us once again. Appreciate you
uh coming back on OddLots.
>> Thank you. Yeah, [clears throat]
congratulations on 10 years ago starting
this thing. I think of how uh the world
has changed in those 10 years and and
you want to talk macro. Listen, I think
you're
>> you've you've heard a thing or two about
it.
>> Yeah.
I I am global macro. Global macro and
and and AI is just a part of that. It's
a small thing in relationship to the
whole global macro. It's a is a how do
you I mean like I know we'll get into
all this thing but again like it feels
like something we're patting ourselves
on the back 10 years podcast 50 years of
running a hedge fund like I say it it
doesn't even seem real that that could
even be possible. I mean I know it
sounds crazy but
>> yeah what a joy what oh it's fantastic.
Yeah. You know I
>> Do you have any tips on longevity
because we're like well we want to be
doing this again in 10 years and maybe
again in
>> No one's asking us about in 40 years.
Yeah. So
>> um
meaningful work and meaningful
relationships. In other words, do you
have is it your passionate to make it as
great as it can be and a shared passion?
And are you doing it with people that
you care about and you have meaningful
relationships and if you've got that you
know you've got the energy to keep
evolving and you know that's what it's
about. I think that's for me what it's
about. How would you characterize this
moment not just in markets but in global
macro as you point out uh in terms of
your experience, your career? How does
it stack up to previous decades?
>> Uh it's part of an it's part of a
long-term evolution that um I'd like to
take you through a brief macro
perspective of that evolution. And I'd
like to start if I could with a little
story of what of of what changed me.
Okay. When I was 12, I uh cattied. I
earned a little bit of money and I put
my money in the stock market because
everybody was in the stock market at the
time. Um and the people I cattied for
would tell me about the stock market.
And um the I bought a company. It was
the only company I ever heard of that
was selling for less than $5 a share.
Um,
>> did you just choose it randomly or
>> It was the only company that was less
than $5 a share that I heard of and I
figured if I could buy more shares so if
it went up I'd make more money. That was
my logic. Okay. [laughter]
>> You know, there are many people today in
the market. Anyway, keep going. But the
silliest lo the number of people out
there who I've believe like have come to
think similar logic particularly in
other areas like crypto. Anyway, keep
going about what I was doing. It was
obviously st uh stupid. But what
happened was it was a company that was
about to go broke. Another company
acquired it. It went up uh tripled in
value. I thought I was smart and this is
an easy game and I got hooked on the
game. Okay. Fast forward
um um graduated college in um 1971,
clerking on the floor of the New York
Stock Exchange before I went to graduate
school in the summer. August 15th, 1971,
President Nixon gets on the television
and says, "You're not going to get the
gold." Gold was money then and you had
paper money and it depreciated in value.
So, um, so you're not going to get the
gold. And I walked on the floor of the
stock exchange the next morning and I
thought, "This is a big crisis. Money as
we know it is ending. We're going to
have a problem." And it went up more
than it had gone up in decades.
>> And I didn't. That's because I didn't
know what a devaluation was. So, I
studied history and I found the exact
same thing happened in March of 1933
with Roosevelt getting on the radio and
making the exact same move because they
didn't have enough real money back then.
It was gold was real money. They didn't
have it. And that led me to realize for
the first time that [snorts] I needed to
understand things that happened before
my lifetime, not just my experiences.
So, I studied the the 30s. And because I
studied the 30s, I was able to
anticipate the 2008 financial crisis
because it was the thing that was
playing over and over again. And there
are those things that are going on now.
Okay, we'll get into those. But there I
it led me study history. And uh so about
six or seven years ago, I studied last
500 years of history to think what
causes r the rise and decline of reserve
currencies in the empires. And I said
last 500 years and there that brings me
to the five big forces.
>> Let's hear them.
>> Okay. The five big forces are and and
they're they each have a mechanics to
them, a dynamic. The first is how
money, debt, markets, and economics
works.
>> Okay? And we'll get into that. The
second
um by the way there's a big cycle there
is and we can call it a monetary order
and there's a monetary order that always
happens and breaks down and it's part of
an arc that has to do with limitations
on debt and money and we'll get into
that
>> like a leverage cycle right
>> how much debt can you take on
>> and what is the value of money is
supposed to have a storehold of wealth
is debt a storehold of wealth wealth and
what is our money? That's a question
that we have to deal with today, right?
What is the money that you can be an
effective storehold of wealth? Okay. And
are we at the end of our debt cycle?
Okay, that's number one. Number two,
related to this money and who has money
and wealth differences and so on.
[snorts] A part of the cycle is that
capitalism creates great opportunities
for inventiveness to be productive and
so on. And it raises living standards
and it raises wealth, but it raises
wealth in an unequal way and there are
big wealth differences that naturally
come as a part of the cycle. And those
wealth and and then values differences
get to a point where there are
irreconcilable differences. So
throughout history, there's the left and
there's the right. There's the rich and
there's the poor. And there are those
who are liberals and those who are
conservatives. And throughout history
they have a conflict particularly if you
have an economic problem. So that's the
second force right.
>> The third force is the changing world
order the international geopolitical
order and that has a cycle to it too.
You start in last time you start 1945
the end of the war. The war determines
who has power. The powerful determine
what the new world order is like. And
then you have the rising power
challenging the existing power and then
you change the dynamic of the world
order. The world order always changes.
The monetary order changes. The domestic
political order changes. The world order
changes and there is that arc. Number
fourth force is acts of nature.
Throughout history, drought, floods and
pandemics have killed more people and
toppled more orders than the first three
that I mentioned. And number five
throughout history is uh man's
inventiveness particularly of new
technologies. Okay. And here we are with
AI. And all of those are connected.
They're each relate. How what happens
with AI affects productivity affects who
gets the money. What happens in
geopolitical? You have to spend money to
have a military and the conflicts. And
then there are trade wars. And it all
transpires pretty much in the same way
over those 500 years. You can see these
cycles in that pattern.
>> It is pretty incredible listening to
this and thinking, you know what, it's
not just our imagination. We are in a
time of extraordinary change. We had a
global pandemic that disrupted life for
everyone on Earth in varying ways, at
least to some extent. We do have this
unbelievable technology that everyone is
trying to wrap their heads around with
AI. We did have even starting, you know,
arguably 10 years ago, the emergence of
serious trade tensions with China. We do
see the emergence of their military
clearly getting much more strong. Like,
you know, you see all these things like
it's not we're I guess we're not
hallucinating. Some big stuff is going
on these days.
>> Well, yes. And the thing that I would
like to uh focus on is the mechanics of
how that happens. The interdep
relationships between where are we in
the debt cycle,
>> where are we in wealth? Well, we we'll
talk about these things I hope and where
what does that mean geopolitical
and so on. And if it for me it's like
watching the movie for over and over
again. there is connections and there's
a cyclicality to this a big cycle
dynamic so that we can step back. I
think everybody looks at the news item
of the day and they don't step back and
see the big arc and the cause effect
relationship. So that's why I'm hoping
we can get into that.
>> Okay. Well, let me try to thread the
needle between the news item of the day
and the big arc. But when you look at
something like AI, how does that fit
into your five forces framework? draw
the lines for us in the
>> I mean first of all it has tremendous
effect on the economics of it right it
looks to me very very similar to all the
times in history um that there was great
inventions and great changes such as the
20s the late 20s
>> so a real productive
>> shift it's it's a change and maybe the
greatest ever but right up there but
let's imagine the 20s okay imagine let
me take you into the
imagine
>> we need to get like a time warp
soundtrack on [laughter] here back in
time.
>> But first time electricity is going into
houses and you can have washing machines
and and refrigerators. First time we
have the car. Okay. First time that we
have airplanes. First time we have
movies that you can go attend. First
time you have radio. You used to have
silence in your house and so on. the in
the first invention of television and so
on. Can you imagine? It was the much
more uh immediate and and exciting. You
see the revolutions and those things and
so there's a mechanic to a mechanism of
which how does wealth get created and
what's the difference of wealth and how
does a bubble come and how does a bubble
go in other words to distinguish it and
that's by the way many of those bubbles.
So you I can go back in history and give
you many examples but that would be a
good example. So what makes it go up and
what is the difference between wealth
and money? So you get into the mechanics
wealth is not money. Okay in order so
and and this becomes very relevant to to
us now. Um in other words it what the
wealth is it's easy to create wealth.
It's because what you do let's say
>> easier for some people but yes go on.
But okay, but let me give you an
example. Okay,
>> you come up with a great idea. You want
to create a unicorn. You sell $50
million of the stock and you value it at
a billion dollars. Okay, now you're a
billionaire and now that company's worth
a billion dollars.
>> But what happens if you actually is it
is it really worth a billion dollar?
>> I think every child or teenagers at some
point had this idea, right? I'm gonna
start a company and then Tracy I was I'm
gonna sell her a dollar's worth of share
but it's just this and suddenly oh I'm a
billion
>> and all this wealth is being created
>> suddenly like I think every everyone has
this scheme at some point in their life
>> the important thing to realize is wealth
is different from money okay wealth you
can't you can't spend wealth you have to
sell wealth in order to get money to go
buy things okay and so how do the
bubbles happen. Okay, the bubbles happen
in the way that you create these needs
for money and then the wealth rises and
then there's a need to sell it. For
example, let's imagine that we put in
wealth taxes.
>> Mhm.
>> Okay. Okay. What's going to happen?
Those are going to need to sell some of
that stock to be able to get up the cash
to be able to pay taxes, right? whether
it for whatever reason the need for cash
happens and you want to make a
conversion from wealth to money to be
able to come up with the money and in
all the bubbles it's worked this way um
it there's not enough cash and there's
the desire for that cash and then you
sell it and the dynamic begins to work
in reverse so that's all I'm talking
about is mechanics so when you ask me
the question and I look at today to
today It looks like another one of
those. Okay, who's got the wealth? And
then where is the vulnerability that can
is this real wealth or is it accounting
wealth? And then uh and and it's people
make the mistake of thinking uh will it
um produce an income over its time in
order to justify that valuation. That's
not what make bubbles. Okay? Because the
answer to that question did not change
between 1928 and 1931.
It's not like they found out the answer
and [laughter] then they say, "Okay,
that's okay." It's this dynamic between
wealth and money. Okay? So there's a
mechanics to the way this happens,
right? And if you understand those and
it it goes back a long time. If you go
back to the Old Testament, the year of
Jubilee, okay, how do you deal with
debt? And you have to pay back the debt
because debt is a need for money. I have
to pay deliver money on my debt. So,
it's important to understand those
mechanics.
>> So, actually, let's get into I have
mechanical question for you that and you
mentioned the idea of a wealth tax. One
of the things that you hear a lot when
people characterize the economy today of
2025 is that a lot of it is riding on
people's wealth. People talk about, you
know, the K-shaped recovery. They talk
about how people in the higher income or
wealth quintiles are really driving
consumption, etc. Then we look at these
large obligations that we have, whether
national debt or just the obligations to
care for seniors, etc. Is this sort of
where it comes together that at some
point maybe we don't call it a wealth
tax etc but where the political entity
feels compelled to go after the quote
wealth the wealth that exists on paper.
>> Yes. And it's happened over and over and
over again for basically the same
reasons. Okay. If you look at the 30s
for example or or it's the same. You
need the money. Okay. So just watch
what's happening. Right. There's a small
group between one and 10% of the
population that um this is going
unbelievably great for, right? And then
there's the bottom 60%. The bottom 60%
are having problems being productive and
being effective. 60% of Americans have
below a sixth grade reading level. Okay.
Um the stock ownership of the top 10%,
they own about 90% of the stocks. um the
bottom 60% own about 5% of the stocks.
So we're seeing this wealth and uh and
so who are you going to get the money
from? The way you used to get the money
[clears throat] was that you would
borrow the money. You would the debt
would continue to rise relative to GDP
or relative to your incomes and it would
and and then then you'd spend. Well,
we're close to not being able to have
that happen for mechanical reasons that
are worth understanding because I and
I'll get into that in a minute, but um
well, I'll I'll I'll get into it now. Um
there when one man's debts are another
man's assets and if you're holding a lot
of bonds, a lot of government bonds,
you're um that's a lot of uh debt. Is
that a good storehold of wealth? And
then when you have the political or
geopolitical problems that are going on,
conflicts, then the foreign ownership o
owners of those who own about a third of
the bonds uh may not want to hold those
bonds because they think it may not be a
good storehold of wealth either because
it's being depreciated or because they
may have sanctions. So if you go back
like into the 30s before there's always
the economic war including the financial
war in which uh entities are cut off
sanctions we call them now. Okay. So
there is this dynamic in which and it's
not just an American dynamic. It's a UK
dynamic. It's a uh France dynamic. It's
a Chinese dynamic in which we're at a
point where it's not easy to keep doing
it the way we were doing it by selling
more and more of those bonds in that
way. And so then, well, look at look at
it. You can't borrow like you used to.
>> Mhm.
>> Number two, you can't tax.
Okay. Politically, it's um I went to
Washington speaking to leaders on both
sides uh and so on. And the answer is um
you know, we I I said we we got to get
the budget down to uh 3% of GDP. And you
can do that if you take it from uh this
a little bit of this and that and you
can do that. Um, but what happens is the
answer I get is and it's the same in the
UK, it's the same in France, same all
around the world. Uh, you have to
understand that I can't I have to make
one of two pledges or both. I will not
raise your taxes and I will not cut your
benefits.
>> Okay. So now you can't borrow.
>> That's not that much.
>> You can't borrow.
>> Yeah.
>> You can't keep it up as it was. You
can't raise the taxes. politics. Okay.
You can't cut the spending. Okay. So,
there we are. It's different from where
you were 10 years ago when you [snorts]
Okay. The world is very different from I
was thinking about your 10th year
anniversary. Okay. 2015.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. So, think about how different the
world is as a function of these five
forces. Right. That's what it looks
like, right?
>> Absolutely. So can we talk about this in
a US context specifically since you
brought up DC, but it feels like the US
especially has changed in 10 years. So
rising inequality, uh the deficit is
higher than ever and we also have an
administration which seems to be um
redefining America's place in the world.
How does that fit into again your five
forces framework? And I guess I should
bring up the debasement trade as well
because this was a big theme earlier in
the year that the the idea that, you
know, people don't want to be in the
dollar because they don't know what's
going to happen with the debt or because
they're worried about sanctions and
limits on currencies.
>> It's all the same, isn't it? And it's
all interrelated, right? I mean, okay,
and it's all understandable, right? It's
all you you have a financial limitation.
You have large wealth gaps. You reach
the point um that um you don't want to
negotiate. You're sick and tired. The
electorate is sick and tired of hearing
these excuses. They want populism. So
populism arises from this and populism
of the left and populism of the right.
So they bit greater polarity and they
say uh I don't want to compromise my the
things I want it delivered uh so win for
me okay win for me uh my values my way
of operating and therefore you have
irreconcilable differences and so if you
look at history the people who arise are
of the same character you have you
produce populists because of that that
set of circumstances while the world is
changing Okay. So what is the place in
the world? Okay. We can't sustain what
we were doing before. Think of the
relationship let's say between the
United States and China by way of
example. Okay. The dynamic of um Chinese
will sell um inexpensive uh their goods
cost effectively. Americans buy it, send
them the money, the Chinese take the
money and they put it into bonds. That
dynamic can't exist anymore. First of
all, they don't trust each other.
Everybody's worried. Okay, the United
States will worry can I can't be
dependent on imports from China. The
Chinese worry that I can't be dependent
that you're going to give me my I'm a
I'm a creditor. Am I going to get my
money? If you study history, maybe
because of conflict, I can be a problem.
You lose the middle class because they
are the manufacturers. You ship
manufacturing to China and so you don't
have the manu and you say we have to
bring back manufacturing. We need
self-sufficiency. Okay. So now
self-sufficiency means you cannot
continue that dynamic anymore. Right?
And then what do you do when there's the
challenge the the wars that are not the
military wars, the trade war, the
technology war, the geopolitical
influence war. It's not like you can go
to what was imagined in the world post
World War II period that the United
States said we're going to have a
multilateral world order. We're going to
have a United Nations and we're going to
go vote and we're going to have um a
world bank and we're going to have an
all these world organiz a world trade
organization and so on. We're going to
have those types of things. Well, that's
that's naive. We're past that. So, we
switch from a un a multilateral world
order to a unilateral world order where
power matters. Right? That's what's
going on. Right.
So Joe, I'm I'm kind of laughing here
because I'm thinking back to both of us
studied international relations in
college. I'm thinking how much time I
spent studying international
institutions like the World Trade
Organization.
>> What a waste of time that turned out to
be.
>> Yeah. Totally irrelevant. Now,
>> can I ask you a personal question? Um,
not that personal, but we had you on the
podcast in March and you were talking
about the scale of the US debt and so
forth and it was, you know, this was on
the eve of when the big tax cut
negotiations were happening. It was
clear that the White House wanted to
push a tax cut and as you mentioned you
went to DC and um you know you say find
there are ways to get the budget deficit
within 3% of GDP. This is not an
insurmountable task but you know right
now there does not seem to be any
meaningful change in the uh spending or
deficit trajectory. Did you find that
personally demoralizing? You were
concerned in March. Now here we are
talking on November 14th. you know the
last eight months have your have you
gotten more concerned did that did that
experience have any effect on you
>> I've been in the markets for a very very
long time I'm a hyper realist I view
everything as a learning experience
>> and so when I don't I don't get
demoralized I find it interesting and
informative so I was disappointed I mean
it would have been better for everybody
if we could work together and we can
also find uh even if we couldn't agree
on how to do it, just do it
proportionately across things to make
those changes to try to bring that in
order. But it was a good reminder of
where we are in the political cycle to
understand the nature of that. And so
that's what it is. You can't be
idealistic. You have to be realistic.
>> I consider myself to be someone who
every new experience is a learning
environment. And that's why I love the
job that I have and everything is new
and interesting. But occasionally things
of the news get to me a little bit more
than I wish they would. It's like
>> there's there's a feeling in the
stomach.
>> Yeah. Yeah. And it's like, oh, this is
not just an intellectual exercise. This
actually has stakes for children.
>> Listen, I've been doing a markets 50
years.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. And a lot of emotion can get in to
the to the way of
>> So, how do you is it the meditation like
meditation has a big effect? Oh, yeah.
Yeah. No, no, no. You're touching on
something, right? Is this like a key
element of separating the emotion from
the learning?
>> That's right. The ability this
meditation I would say would be maybe
the single most important reason for
whatever success I've had. I mean
meaning it has given me an equinimity
to step back to see the ark to accept
there's a life cycle. Okay, I'm 76 years
old. I know where it is. people uh you
know there's all sorts of things that we
all go through and so on to the ability
to step back align the subliminal the
subconscious mind which has an effect
and the intellectual mind to be able to
do that while still feeling the emotions
but being able to um look down on how
does reality work and almost u even
things we don't wish were true um you
know it's like um the tooth fairy or
Santa Claus. Okay, we wish that we were
exist, but we can accept the fact that
they don't exist. Don't have our
preconception and just learn here's
reality and how to deal with reality.
Meditation has helped me a lot to do
that. And but I think that's the right
approach.
>> Well, okay. So, if you meditate and you
recognize the arc of history, what do
you actually do with that information,
especially if you're trading or
investing? Because I think part of the
problem when we have these conversations
is we talk about like, oh, the debt
keeps going up and there's political
polarization and it just seems like
there there aren't many solutions to
those problems and there's not much we
can do with that recognition.
>> Oh, I see I dis I disagree. I think that
what I think you'll ask yourself how
does it work mechanistically?
>> What effect can I have on how it's
handled? how how any difficult situation
is handled like being in debt and having
these conflicts and so on. how do you
handle it well for the for the greater
good and whatever and then um or maybe
you can't change the world but you can
deal with it yourself and what do I do
to take care of myself my family and and
so on and you can um do you can deal
with that by first understanding how
does it work mechanistically
that's that's why I wrote these books
the last book is how countries go broke
I'm not it's it's the mechanics of it
and so You could see it as indicators
and you can do the calculation and you
can line it up with what's happening and
you know where you are. You know how you
can store your money. How do you what's
a storehold of wealth? So you can have a
skill and you can understand what's
going on and you can understand how to
position yourself and or and you can
maybe bring it to Washington and you or
other places and you can show
>> Dio you can bring it to Washington but
it's the mechanics for the odds podcast
by the way. It is not it is not an
ideology. Okay. To separate yourself
from there are different views and
different preferences and there's the
left and the right and I can't tell you
whether the left or the right that's a
different question. But whether you're
of the left or you're of the right
they're dealing with the same mechanics
and if you understand those mechanics
then you as a policy maker can do it.
And now we're in a situation of course
that polic politics is part of that
mechanics. Okay, now we have to accept
the politics and then we have to say
where are we going and how do we best
deal with that? You can do all of that.
>> You said the thing of, you know,
sometimes there are truths that we don't
want to exist and maybe we try to turn
our face or we imagine the two things
>> and they think that's bad.
>> Well, yeah. Right. And so [laughter] we
don't want that to be true.
>> No, no, it's just reality.
>> You know, there's um one of the phrases
that the uh the CCP has over in China,
seeking truth from facts. And it sounds
very obvious, but it is very hard to do
it. It can be hard to just look at facts
and actually observe the world as it is
rather than the observ.
>> I think part of it is a habit.
>> Mhm. Similar.
>> If I mean
I think that if we're if we're taught um
the emotional like um
what is real? Reality
>> is interesting. reality is beautiful in
a sense. If you take evolution and
things die and and and things happen,
they may not. It's like if you recognize
that and you think that way and it's all
part of that evolution and you and and
you can get that in your mindset, that's
so much better than being able than
saying um I don't know, dying is bad.
I mean give that as an example or this
thing is bad and when we approach it
that this thing is bad and so on then
it's that fault of that thing rather
than okay how does the system work and
then how do I then deal with the system
to get the best outcome because we could
deal with the system for example the the
mechanics today has a lot to do with um
how people deal with each
Right? In other words, if we were
collectively
being able to solve these problems and
and put the collective well-being ahead,
we would have a lot less wars. We'd have
a lot better solving of problems, not
the ideological, and I have to fight for
that kind of thing. So, it's an
approach. That approach could be taken
on and taught.
>> This is the idea that you can't control
the world, but you can control your
reactions to could influence the world.
people together, world leaders, if they
were to try to say what is the common
good and how do we work it out
mechanistically
so that okay, somebody's going to give
here and somebody's going to give there
and then we but that'll produce a better
outcome than if we go to war or
[laughter] you know there's there there
are better approaches that leaders of
countries yes there's leaders can of
countries can do this and also
individuals can do this in terms of what
they're going to be with others. Have
you ever considered going into politics
or policy? Is that something that you
>> Not since I smartened up
>> because you know what I think it's I
have great admiration great appreciation
for the people who take on that life but
um we have a challenge in terms of even
how the system works because there are
so many people right now who have have
opinions want to fight for those
opinions. they determine the votes. Then
you then they create people who are
acting out and all of these things. You
know, it's um it's not an effective way
of it's very difficult to be successful.
>> I do think though I am worried
how often you encounter intelligent
people, thoughtful people, etc. And when
you ask them if they ever consider
elected office, immediately the answer
is no. Like it's it's actually a little
bit disturbing. It is disturbing how
quickly basically anyone sane would have
that. Anyone who's sane would say of
course I would never go into elected
office or never pursue elected office
because you look around the
environment's miserable but then you
think well what kind of filter does that
have on the actual leaders that we end
up do get
>> but that's a reality.
>> It is a reality but as we look but no I
know I know but when you think about
that filter and you think about okay you
want quality leadership etc. Well, look,
think about anyone who seems like
normally sane immediately says, "Of
course, I would never go into elect."
>> Right? So, let's just look at that for a
minute and take it through the
perspective that I'm uh uh trying to
convey. Um we look at that and how it's
different from 10 or 20 years ago and
how the people are.
>> So, the first thing we should do is
besides saying that's terrible, we
should look at why is that okay? Does
that make sense? Yes. Why? I we can
answer that. We It makes sense. Yeah.
>> We There's the clash. The party
alignment. Be analytical. Okay. And then
say, "Okay, what do we do?" Okay. What
does So maybe you're contributing to
good things in your way and you know,
but you have to be practical. If you're
going to have an effect there, you have
to have an effect on the people who have
their hands on the levers of power. they
affect things, not us chatting away
here, okay? And and the voters maybe,
but what can you do to help to bring
about it or what do you need to do
yourself in order to do that? So, you
have to be analytical and um and uh
mechanical about what the cause effect
relationships because it comes back to
the mechanics cause effect relationship.
uh if you understand the cause effect
relationships like how politics works,
how the populations work, you can be
analytical in doing that. But also the
cause, you can get ahead of the game
because the causes happen before the
effects and if you know the cause effect
relationship and you could see the
causes and imagine the effects, you can
be ahead of the game. Is there anything
in your um you know very long career
experience that didn't match up with
previous examples or cycles in history
>> all the time?
I mean all
of my 1971 in other words I had a
preconception. I walk on the floor of
the stock exchange and um and I realized
wow okay now I go to the 30s and I learn
something right
>> and um
>> what about a Bridgewwater? Any any
interesting times with that? Yeah, I I I
can get. But what I've learned is that
whatever success in life I've had is
also more because I know how to deal
with what I don't know
>> than anything I know. Okay, I learned
that. Okay, I know some things, but what
I don't know about what the future is
and so on still very large. So, I
learned how to uh diversify. I learned
how through financial engineering in
terms of controlling I could through
diversification
uh improve my return to risk ratio by a
factor of five
be by keeping the return the same and
diversifying well that will reduce the
risk without reducing the returns that's
mechanics that came from my knowing that
I don't know that I can't be sure okay
so when you're analytical that way and
you view these things as a puzzle then
there are all these puzzles and you have
to solve the puzzles but if you can do
it calmly and analytically and so on you
can engineer the mechanics or how you're
dealing with it that's what I mean by
principles for dealing with reality
>> and what about at Bridgewwater was there
ever like
>> times that all the time something moment
>> all the time um you know I knew what I
wanted okay that that was that's an
advantage if you start a you can make it
what you want, what the culture should
be. Um, and you know, in one sentence, I
wanted meaningful work and meaningful
relationships through radical
truthfulness and radical transparency.
Okay. So, I I I really believe that if
you can have meaningful work, in other
words, something you're into the mission
and you have great um relationships with
people who are in that mission, maybe
it's you two uh with odd lots, okay? I
don't know what it is. But if you're on
that mission and you have a great
relationship and so on, that's magical.
But you also need to have radical
truthfulness. In other words, if you
don't think he's doing a good job and he
or vice versa or something like it's
like it's like a team. You've got to put
together a team that I'm not picking on
you.
>> No, no, no. I'm just trying to say we're
pretty honest. It occurs to me.
>> But let me finish answering your
question, okay? because I haven't gotten
to the challenges. Okay, I want that. I
believe in that truthfulness and and so
on. So then u there are tradeoffs. Not
everybody likes that. Okay, not
everybody, you know, there's an aversion
to looking at mistakes. There's an
aversion to looking at weaknesses.
>> How do you get over that where in other
words and and so I I I had to face these
questions and deal with it. That's what
led to my first book, Principles of Life
and Work. But in other words, when we
recognize that knowing our weaknesses is
a great thing, it's a great power. Do so
how do you objectively get to the notion
of knowing your strengths and
weaknesses? And I created personality
profile test there for your listeners.
Go to it's a free test uh principles you
you can go online and learn about your
nature and what your nature is and how
you deal with things. So there's the
constant encountering reality, what your
goals are and what your aspirations are
and and and so I encounter that. I
thought that's your question and I
encounter that and then you realize you
encounter obstacles and then you view
those obstacles as puzzles as you that
you have to solve in order to get better
because you have choices and if you make
better choices you get better outcomes.
So that I'm giving that as an example.
So recognizing that it's not the best
place for some people and that other
people couldn't possibly work anywhere
else because they can't get the
meaningful work and meaningful
relationship or the truthfulness, you
know, the truthfulness, the politics
politics that goes on in companies and
so on. These people a lot of them could
can't work anywhere else because they
can't get that truthfulness and that
that spirit. Um, so yes, it's constantly
finding these things out through
discovering of interacting with reality
and then solving puzzles and developing
principles.
>> It occurs to me when you talk about this
like it's become very popular maybe in
the last 10 years but probably a little
bit longer people love to talk about
corporate culture. This place is a good
corporate culture. This place is a bad
corporate culture. What is the corporate
culture of Silicon Valley? What is the
corporate culture of the big banks etc.
I mean you clearly were very one thing
you're clearly very ahead of the curve
is just thinking about this term
corporate culture
>> you know there's a term and it's just
like what do you want to do how do you
want to behave with each other I mean we
don't have to even use the word
corporate culture in any relationship if
you have a marriage if you have
friendships if you have partnerships
it's you have to face the question of
how you'd want to be with each other.
>> Yeah.
>> Well how do you actually shape the
culture then? Well, um, two ways. I know
what I believe is best and whatever, but
I'm not actually sure. And then I go
through the question and answer. I
believe I should have an idea of
meritocracy. That's a different from
values. Different people can live their
lifestyles, different kinds of
lifestyles, freedom of choice to operate
that way. But I kind of know what I
believe is best and what I want. And
then I uh and then I have uh openness to
uh debate. Is that right? Is that the
best? Because if you have an idea
meritocracy where you can have anybody
debate anything, you know, anybody at
Bridgewater at any time could say could
challenge me on anything. And I felt the
obligation for everybody to hear that
exchange of why I think this is best and
not and then let people make decisions
or enlighten me when it comes to that
tradeoff because otherwise they wouldn't
be invested in.
>> How do you know to take it on a
practical level? How do you deal with
them in an environment in which people
are encouraged to be transparent and to
be critical even uh senior people or
junior people? How do you avoid the
pitfall of bullying in mobs? Because I
think this is actually very relevant
when you think about politics, you think
about social media, etc. How do you pro
how do you prevent an environment of
openness from turning into mob
psychology?
>> Um uh I I'll tell you how I do it. And
uh and uh just also accept the fact that
in any of these things you're it it none
of them is perfect. Okay. Okay. But you
first of all uh you first you go and you
paint the picture of how it should be.
Okay. And you know that not anyone's
view is um objective. Okay. Is your uh
point of view and your point of view may
be different and highlight that. So I if
you go to uh TED talks there's a TED
talk I gave and it shows how we created
I created a a tool called a dot
collector which everybody is putting as
we're having meetings putting their
thoughts in and so on and their
reactions so we feel free to give your
thoughts bring it up including critical
thoughts and not then you get to what I
call believability decision way to
decision making um how do you get about
whether this person is a better decision
maker what the strengths and weaknesses
of a person of each person is so that
they can play their role well if you try
if you set that out as your aspiration
you'll find ways of doing that like
there may be tests there may be you know
how do you pick your doctor you know you
have you might want
>> who has an appointment open
you know what get three smart people the
three best or the two best get a second
opinion and you want to make sure. So,
it's the same thing in picking people
there. And how do you do that? You want
that. And then you have to let people
know that that's good for them and it's
good for the organization that it's
fair. Okay? That the process is fair.
It's not one person making a
pronouncement of what another person is
like. [clears throat] That you go
through the cases and you say, "Oh, that
case happened that way and it happened
again. What do you think?" And so on.
You work your way. Once you have the
notion that the system is fair and
you're just trying to get at what's true
and what are people's strengths and
weaknesses and so on, you're making
great leaps toward that as distinct from
most companies in which they don't talk
about that and you know or they're
behind the scenes. Like I had a rule um
if you talk behind somebody's back three
times or more u uh critically, you're
out. Okay? and and but if but you're
always free to bring it up and deal with
it because let's deal with it. Let's try
to find out what the problem is and deal
with it that way. So on the bullying
they can tell the bully. Okay, you can
tell the why why did you do that? Why is
that that way? Um but in any case that
was my path or whether you choose a
different path I think you have to agree
that getting a truthfulness um teams
sports teams have to do this right um uh
so you how do you select I'm sorry
you're not doing a good job at that
thing you have to deal with it um and
you have to make the team great it's
like that
>> well so now I have to ask what do you
think about multistrats and the pod
shops because the culture that you're
laying out where everyone is sort of
talking to each other and challenging
each other seems very very different to
the multistrat model that seems to be
much more predicated on you know little
teams that are sort of often doing their
own thing.
>> There's different ways to play the game.
That's a totally valid way to play the
game and and maybe relate maybe it's
just a totally utilitarian way in that
way. There's um is it effective in
making the investment decision can be
very effective for lots of reasons I can
digress into uncorrelated return streams
many operation blah blah blah blah blah
that could be very effective uh it may
not be effective of creating uh the
meaningful relationships and those types
of things. Therefore you're going to
have to a continuity and a
competitiveness problem. In other words,
people will go for uh, you know, a
little bit what we've seen a little bit
of that, haven't we? A little bit more
money, a little bit more. They're not in
it together. They're not sharing their
lives. They're not sharing their mission
together and so on. So maybe it's a f
totally fine way for the investment
management, but it's not a fine way for
building a 50year-old I did this. I
built a 50year-old organization while
others have
>> it is raised the question like in those
environments like what is the franchise
value because what hap right what seems
to be this this model which has produced
extraordinary returns for some investors
you do get the situation in which
everyone is sort of a mercenary and
everyone and then and everyone you know
you dangle these big paychecks and
bonuses and you're hard to build
>> yeah it's hard to imagine that
environment building a 50-year franchise
I
>> I think I think it's not I think it's
not going to last. Interesting.
>> And it's particularly in the area of uh
an AI.
>> Say more. Say more.
>> Okay. I think that you're going to have
and I'm going to try to help it have um
AI enabled
um
ability to be an independent investment
manager. Okay. Like Uber.
>> Okay.
>> Okay. Uber's got a technology that they
take the individual, they plug them into
that uh that technology and whatever and
everybody can do that in a sense. I
think we're going to be moving more into
that direction. So, what is it? It uh
but I I don't this that's a path that we
can go down and um that's a whole other
path.
>> Well, you said you're going to try to
help it. What does that mean? Are you
working on something? Well, I might I'm
building my own ability and I want to
share how uh people can do certain
things. That's it.
>> But you don't think this model this
because it's been very hot. Again, talk
about things that have changed 10 years.
10 years ago, we were not talking about
multistrat fund to funds.
>> Yeah. Fund of funds much more back then.
You're a little it sounds you're
skeptical that this model will endure
much will endure.
>> Well, I think in everybody I'm just
looking at mechanistic.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Talk about it.
>> Okay. So what creates cohesiveness?
You have to have the need for
cohesiveness. Okay. What is the
cohesiveness? What is the commitment?
Okay. I think when we help each other, I
believe in
um how people can help each other. Okay.
Are they helping each other? Can they be
better? And that's the question, isn't
it?
>> Okay. So when we're thinking multistrap
if everybody's there and you put it
together as that that could be done
technologically very easily
>> right so is that going to stick it
together okay what is a relationship
like
>> okay to be on the mission together and
to have relationships and so on is
invaluable not only in terms of
effectiveness in terms of doing job
because different people have different
skills and you do that together but it
is also psychologically rewarding the
greatest source of happiness. Okay, this
is this is I think an important thing.
Studies of happiness all around the
world and so on shows that uh income
past a certain level does not bring a
higher level of happiness once you get
the basics taken care of. That the
greatest source of happiness is
community.
>> Yeah.
>> Do I have a sense of community? Okay.
People who are there for me and I can
help and I work for that. That's a
powerful force and it's very rewarding.
Okay, those are my thoughts.
>> I have one more question since we're
being very retrospective here and
nostalgic in some ways. Do you think if
you were setting out today, do you think
you would have been able to create a
Bridgewater in the current environment?
>> Yep.
>> How would you do? I think I I think and
I think that um everybody can and um
that entrepreneurship
is is so clearly an example that it is
the greatest power. Money is not the
greatest power. Um money will seek out
the people, the entrepreneur, the person
who has the talent. get have enabled
people and then money will go to them to
make them that's that's what investors
do we try to find those people are going
to make these new things wonderful
things happen so the talent of an
individual to attract money to attract
the resources that are necessary for
success okay then we can do that now the
question is how are you okay are you the
next one of those who's got the ideas
and can put that together and make the
case for your supports that I need this
this and the other thing and grow and
become better. Yes, I believe that we're
in a period of time that that's very
very good. You need different resources
than you did. You know, the way I did it
is I played I was a kid. I played the
markets. I like the markets. Then one
day I make a pitch to somebody um uh you
know I I did my thing and then the World
Bank gave me a $5 million account. Uh um
and and okay, World Bank gives me a $5
million account because we were just
talking about markets and they gave me a
$5 million account and that's started me
in the institutional asset management
business. Then the next one gives me the
account. Then I get to build a track
record. Then I get to build the things I
need. I mean right now I if you're
running an operation uh it can be
expensive because you need compliance
department, you have to deal with the
regulatory things. you have a lot of
those things expend but you can find
your way.
>> Ray Dalio, founder of Bridgewater, thank
you so much for uh coming on back on the
podcast and uh
>> so good to be back and congratulations
again for your 10 years. Keep it up.
>> Thank you so much. Well, uh looking
forward to our 50th year. That'll be it.
We'll see if we can pull that off.
Anyway, that was fantastic. Thank you so
much.
>> Thank you.
>> Um Tracy, 50 years is insane. I mean,
that's insane like in any field, media,
whatever.
>> It actually is. Yeah, but when I like
when I said that last and when he said
he ran that almost seems too hard to
wrap my head around that you could run
something for 50 a hedge fund that it
could survive that long and like that's
an incredible track record.
>> Yeah. Well, he said he was 76 years old.
So,
>> yeah. No, must have started it very very
young. Yeah.
>> 26. Um Yeah. I don't know. I' I'm kind
of in I'm in a strange mood now. I'm
very like introspective and
retrospective and thinking about the
future. But I do think you know it it is
true he pioneered a lot of stuff like
culture um and we hear a lot of stuff
about Bridgewwater's very uh special
culture in some distinct culture
distinct culture. Yeah. Um, you know,
I'll say a couple things is just is
that, you know,
I feel like as a as a middle-aged man,
you know, you start to like change your
view on the world and you're like, wait,
do I does everything seem a little crazy
objectively or is it just my state in
life? And what I
>> am I losing touch?
>> No, I think it's important. And I
actually would like the answer in some
way to be that I'm losing touch like
everything's totally fine. I'm just sort
of like aging, sort of out of touch
these days. And so I don't know whether
I find it like reassuring or not that no
like these are really big things that
are going on and all of these things
these big historical forces we've got a
bunch of them all sort of converging at
once. Well, they are big things going
on, but I think one comforting thing,
and this is why I I think people tend to
read history in times of change. Um,
because you feel very unsettled. You
feel very insecure. And so, you look
back at history and you start seeing
these patterns to raise point. And then
you're like, "Oh, okay.
>> Maybe things will be all right." But
also, you can read certain history books
and think, "Oh, god, things are going to
be terrible."
>> No, I know. It's all It's all about the
book CJ. I suppose it's about the time
frame. I mean the other thing and uh Ray
mentioned this in terms of legacy. I do
associate um Bridgewater specifically
with um teaching lots of people about
the sort of specific ways that you can
achieve great returns through leverage
plus diversification which is sort of
like the magic that um that they brought
to it which is we're going to diversify.
And you typically associate
diversification with I'm gonna sleep
better at night but I'm gonna sacrifice
return right that's fine but this idea
is like well maybe you can like sort of
you know get achieve both through
leverage and of course it worked uh
really well and um yeah the results
speak for themsel also interesting his
comments about mac I'm glad you asked
that question about multistract because
that was very interesting
>> well this idea that relationships or
like personal camaraderie is the glue
that sort of holds the whole thing
together.
>> I think if you talk to people really in
that in that world
>> like the money can be great obviously
but I never ever sounds like a
particularly satisfying life uh in terms
of you know everyone is aware that
they're on a short leash etc. There's
not really much of a team etc. It seems
very mercenary and so forth someone else
are leaving all the time.
>> People leave all the time. Yeah. And so
it is interesting to think, you know,
there have been some implosions, not
really blowups per se, but implosions.
It it does sort you do sort of wonder
whether the balance of power or whether
the how sustainable this model is. It's
been a while since we've done a
multistrand episode, so it's a good
reminder we should revisit it because
there have been some developments.
>> Yeah. All right. Shall we leave it
there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Alaway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our
producers, Carmen Rodriguez, at Carmen
Arman, dash Bennett at Dashbot, and Kale
Brooks at Kaleb Brooks.
>> For more OddLotss content, you can check
out our daily newsletter, you'll find
that at bloomberg.com/odlotss.
>> And you can join fellow listeners, chat
with them 247 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlotss.
>> And if you enjoyed the conversation,
then please like, leave a comment, or
better yet, subscribe. Thanks for
watching.
[music]